Adding documentation about moving handlers between the endpoints (#5455)
Particular/docs.particular.net: nservicebus/messaging/moving-handlers.md

---
title: Moving Handlers

> summary: Guidelines for choosing a way how ot move handlers between the endpoints

Reviewer: ```suggestion
summary: Guidelines on how to move handlers between the endpoints
```

reviewed: 2021-09-01
component: Core
isLearningPath: true
---

> As distributed systems evolve, the need to change which endpoint handles a message may rise. During the development phase, such changes are relatively straightforward, but when the system is in production additional considerations need to be given to messages that are in-flight. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As distributed systems evolve, the need may arise to change which endpoint handles a message. During the development phase, such changes are relatively straightforward, but when the system is in production additional considerations need to be given to messages that are in-flight. 
```

> As the distributed systems evolve, sometimes there is a need to change which Endpoint handle which message type. During development phase such changes are relativelly straightforward, but when the system is in production additional consideration need to be given to the messages that are in-flight. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As distributed systems evolve, the need to change which endpoint handles a message may rise. During the development phase, such changes are relatively straightforward, but when the system is in production additional considerations need to be given to messages that are in-flight. 
```

## How to move Handlers in between Endpoints

> To move a handler from SourceEndpoint to a DestinationEndpoint the following steps needs to be taken

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To move a handler from `SourceEndpoint` to a `DestinationEndpoint`, the following steps need to be taken:
```

Reviewer: I haven't made the change throughout my suggestions, but I find SourceEndpoint and DestinationEndpoint conflated as you could read them as "the endpoint sending the message" and "the endpoint receiving the message". Wouldn't it be easier to give a real-world example here? For example, a Sales endpoint that used to handle Invoicing, and we're trying to move out the ProcessInvoiceHandler to a dedicated Invoicing endpoint.

Author: Yeah I struggled with the naming here. I was tempted to follow the way that is used in contracts:
To move a handler from an endpoint from now on called: `Duck` to another endpoint from now on called: `Donald` or something. But still I struggled with the names. Maybe I should go with:
 - Reciever and New receiver. 
 - Empire and New Order
 - R2D2 and C3PO

Reviewer: You have my blessing for the latter 😆

>  - Copy the handler into DestinationEndpoint and deploy that endpoints. Now both endpoints are handling the same message type.
>  - Make sure that new Endpoint recieves the messages that it should be handling. From now on all newly send messages would only go to the DestinationEndpoint.
>  - After ensuring that the SourceEndpoint does not have any remaining messages of the type that should be processed by DestinationEndpoint, delete the handler from SourceEndpoint and deploy it.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Copy the handler into `DestinationEndpoint` and deploy that endpoint. Now both endpoints are handling the same message type.
 - Make sure that `DestinationEndpoint` receives the messages that it should be handling. From now on all newly sent messages should only go to the DestinationEndpoint.
 - After ensuring that the `SourceEndpoint` does not have any remaining messages of the type that should be processed by `DestinationEndpoint`, delete the handler from `SourceEndpoint` and deploy it.

```

Reviewer: This example assumes a single sending endpoint. Should there be some consideration around the behavior when there are multiple sending endpoints? In that case, you would update sender by sender, but that also means that the ´SourceEndpoint´ would still be receiving messages by senders that haven't been updated, right?

Author: Yeah, good catch. I will add that

### How to ensure that the messages get to the DestinationEndpoint

> This depends on if the message is a command or an event. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This depends on whether the message is a command or an event. 
```

> When the handler process events, it is important for the DestinationEndpoint to subscribe to that event. That will ensure that this event is delievered to DestinationEndpoint. Followed by that SourceEndpoint should unsubscribe from that event to ensure that no new events are delievered to the SourceEndpoint queue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the handler process events, it is important for the `DestinationEndpoint` to subscribe to that event. That will ensure that this event is delivered to `DestinationEndpoint`. Followed by that, `SourceEndpoint` should unsubscribe from that event to ensure that no new events are delivered to the `SourceEndpoint` queue.
```

> When the handler process commands, then every piece of code that sends that command needs to be updated to send them to a queue of DestinationEndpoint. In the meantime the SourceEndpoint handler may be changed to [forward the messages to the new destination](/nservicebus/messaging/forwarding.md). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the handler processes commands, every piece of code that sends that command needs to be updated to send them to a queue of `DestinationEndpoint`. In the meantime, the `SourceEndpoint`-handler may be changed to [forward the messages to the new destination](/nservicebus/messaging/forwarding.md). 
```

> ### How to handle error messages that were discovered after removing the handler

Reviewer 2: Excellent that you did not miss this! Well done! :-)

Author: It is Murphy's law: If something can go wrong, it will go wrong

> When a set of messages are found that were send to a SourceEndpoint and a handler was already removed, a [retry redirect](/servicepulse/redirect.md) could be set up to redirect every failed message to a queue of a DestinationEndpoint. After retrieving those messages, the redirect retry should be removed. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a set of messages are found that were sent to a `SourceEndpoint` and a handler was already removed, a [retry redirect](/servicepulse/redirect.md) could be set up to redirect every failed message to a queue of a `DestinationEndpoint`. After retrieving those messages, the redirect retry should be removed. 
```

Reviewer: This is a good point, but it's also an added reason to separate evolving the handler from moving the handler. So what I'm saying is, shouldn't we discourage moving handlers in the same set of changes as evolving the contract?

Author: I am not certain if I understand, Since moving of handler includes removing it from one endpoint, it can happen that you will remove it to soon. There could be a failed message that you forgot about, or delayed message waiting a week to be delivered, then redirects can be helpful

Reviewer: No, what I meant, is that when moving a handler from one endpoint to another, it's not a good idea to make a change to the contract as part of that same change, otherwise, it will be a lot more complex to handle failed messages after the redirect. It can work if you did everything right, but the margin for error is bigger. Does that make sense?

> ## Why to move handlers between endpoints

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Reasons to move handlers between endpoints
```

### Throughput limitations

> It may happen that Endpoint, which handle many message types, can't keep up with the volume of messages that it gets. One of the solution would be to separate the handlers to divide the load into more Endopoints. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It may happen that an endpoint that handles multiple message types, can't keep up with the volume of messages that it receives. One of the solutions would be to separate high throughput handlers into separate endpoints, to divide the load into more endpoints. 
```

> ### Different SLA'a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Different SLA's
```

> When Endpoint process many different message types, sometimes some of the messages should be processed faster than the others, or service level agreement for given message type could be different than the others. At those cases the easiest solution is to move processing of that message to a separate Endpoint in which case those message types don't have to compete with other message types in the queue. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When an endpoint processes multiple message types, sometimes some of the messages should be processed faster than others, or service level agreements for a given message type could differ from others. In those cases, the easiest solution is to move the processing of that message to a separate endpoint so that those message types don't have to compete with other message types in the queue. 
```
